= Update Commands =

To eliminate most of the question in IRC and to start a good documentation process (also to push Zero_Chaos to put a livecd out), I've written a Wiki for updating Pentoo

Follow these steps from a fresh install to bring your system up to date.


emerge --sync 

emerge -1 portage 

layman -S && layman -d pentoo && layman -a pentoo 

emerge -1 pentoo-etc-portage && etc-update 

emerge -C talloc && emerge -1 talloc

emerge -f dev-java/sun-jdk dev-java/sun-jre 

emerge --update --update --newuse world -vatf

smart-live-rebuild

revdep-rebuild

= *Details* =

1.)Sync with the gentoo portage tree

2.)Updates portage

3.)Sync the pentoo overlay, Deletes old overlay address, adds new 
overlay address

4.)pentoo-etc-portage controls what version of everything gets installed, update your /etc choose -5 to auto update

5.)This version of that app will stop you from updating world so we manually remove and re-emerge the new version.

6.)Download everything we need first to ensure it works.

7.)"--update" applications and their "--deep" dependencies --newuse emerge with new use flags, -v verbose -a ask -t tree -f fetchonly Instead of doing any package building, just perform fetches for all  packages.

8.)Check live packages for updates and emerge them as necessary.

9.)This tool is Gentoo's Reverse Dependency rebuilder. It will scan your 
installed ebuilds to find packages that have become broken as a result of an upgrade of a package they depend on.

Any questions, comments, errors... just ask.

The_Eccentric