#summary UEFI: Tools and ebuilds for UEFI support

= Introduction =

UEFI tools are available from [http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/tianocore]:<br/>
_The open source components of Intel's implementation of UEFI._<br/>

== Tools ==

These tools are covered:
  * EFI shell: Simple shell environment
  * QEMU-KVM support: OVMF contains a sample UEFI firmware for QEMU and KVM.
  * Hello World: A sample application for testing.


= Sources and Installation =

The ebuilds are currently in the _wuodan_ overlay. Add it with:
{{{
layman -a wuodan
}}}

*Building of the binaries does currently not work on hardened!*

== EFI Shell ==

The EFI shell provides a simple shell environment, which can be used to start other EFI applications, like kernels.<br/>
By default, it starts a file startup.nsh, the below examples will boot the pentoo kernel.</br>

Available by 3 methods:
  * Binary build from tianocore, see [UEFI_3_EfiShell].
  * Binary build by Wuodan, use ebuild _sys-firmware/edk2-bin_ with flag _shell_.
  * Build it yourself, use ebuild _sys-firmware/edk2_ with flag _shell_.

== UEFI support by QEMU/KVM ==
`qemu-kvm` simply needs a new bios module. Get it by one of:
  * Binary build by Wuodan, use ebuild _sys-firmware/edk2-bin_ with flag _qemu_.
  * Build it yourself, use ebuild _sys-firmware/edk2_ with flag _qemu_.

== "Hello World" Sample ==
Comes handy for testing, especially with the qemu support. Get it by one of:
  * Binary build by Wuodan, use ebuild _sys-firmware/edk2-bin_ with flag _hello-world_.
  * Build it yourself, use ebuild _sys-firmware/edk2_ with flag _hello-world_.
